Doc: Add status page for different implementations. (#11772)
apache/iceberg: site/docs/status.md

| listTable       | Y    | Y         | Y    | Y  |
| createTable     | Y    | Y         | Y    | Y  |
| dropTable       | Y    | Y         | Y    | Y  |
| loadTable       | Y    | Y         | Y    | Y  |
| updateTable     | Y    | Y         | Y    | Y  |
| renameTable     | Y    | Y         | Y    | Y  |
| tableExists     | Y    | Y         | Y    | Y  |

#### View Spec V1

| View Operation | Java | PyIceberg | Rust | Go |
|----------------|------|-----------|------|----|
| createView     | Y    | N         | N    | N  |
| dropView       | Y    | N         | N    | N  |
| listView       | Y    | N         | N    | N  |
| viewExists     | Y    | N         | N    | N  |
| replaceView    | Y    | N         | N    | N  |
| renameView     | Y    | N         | N    | N  |

#### Namespace Operations

| Namespace Operation       | Java | PyIceberg | Rust | Go |
|---------------------------|------|-----------|------|----|
| listNamespaces            | Y    | N         | N    | N  |
| createNamespace           | Y    | N         | N    | N  |
| dropNamespace             | Y    | Y         | Y    | Y  |
| namespaceExists           | Y    | N         | N    | N  |

> | renameNamespace           | Y    | N         | N    | N  |
> | updateNamespace           | Y    | N         | N    | N  |
> | updateNamespaceProperties | Y    | Y         | Y    | Y  |
> | loadNamespaceMetadata     | Y    | N         | N    | N  |

Reviewer: typo/duplicate as I don't think there's an `updateNamespace` that's different from `updateNamespaceProperties`, and `renameNamespace` isn't a function in the JdbcCatalog:
```suggestion
| updateNamespaceProperties | Y    | Y         | Y    | Y  |
| loadNamespaceMetadata     | Y    | N         | N    | N  |
```
https://github.com/apache/iceberg/blob/540d6a6251e31b232fe6ed2413680621454d107a/core/src/main/java/org/apache/iceberg/jdbc/JdbcCatalog.java#L809

|-----------------|------|-----------|------|----|
| listTable       | Y    | Y         | Y    | Y  |
| createTable     | Y    | Y         | Y    | Y  |
| dropTable       | Y    | Y         | Y    | Y  |
| loadTable       | Y    | Y         | Y    | Y  |
| updateTable     | Y    | Y         | Y    | Y  |
| renameTable     | Y    | Y         | Y    | Y  |
| tableExists     | Y    | Y         | Y    | Y  |

#### View Spec V1

| View Operation | Java | PyIceberg | Rust | Go |
|----------------|------|-----------|------|----|
| createView     | Y    | N         | N    | N  |
| dropView       | Y    | N         | N    | N  |
| listView       | Y    | N         | N    | N  |
| viewExists     | Y    | N         | N    | N  |
| replaceView    | Y    | N         | N    | N  |
| renameView     | Y    | N         | N    | N  |

#### Namespace Operations

| Namespace Operation       | Java | PyIceberg | Rust | Go |
|---------------------------|------|-----------|------|----|
| listNamespaces            | Y    | N         | N    | N  |
| createNamespace           | Y    | N         | N    | N  |
| dropNamespace             | Y    | N         | N    | N  |

> | namespaceExists           | Y    | N         | N    | N  |
> | renameNamespace           | Y    | N         | N    | N  |
> | updateNamespaceProperties | Y    | Y         | Y    | Y  |

Reviewer: GlueCatalog doesn't seem to have 1renameNamespace`

```suggestion
| namespaceExists           | Y    | N         | N    | N  |
| updateNamespaceProperties | Y    | Y         | Y    | Y  |
```

https://github.com/apache/iceberg/blob/main/aws/src/main/java/org/apache/iceberg/aws/glue/GlueCatalog.java

| listTable       | Y    | Y         | Y    | Y  |
| createTable     | Y    | Y         | Y    | Y  |
| dropTable       | Y    | Y         | Y    | Y  |
| loadTable       | Y    | Y         | Y    | Y  |
| updateTable     | Y    | Y         | Y    | Y  |
| renameTable     | Y    | Y         | Y    | Y  |
| tableExists     | Y    | Y         | Y    | Y  |

#### View Spec V1

| View Operation | Java | PyIceberg | Rust | Go |
|----------------|------|-----------|------|----|
| createView     | Y    | N         | N    | N  |
| dropView       | Y    | N         | N    | N  |
| listView       | Y    | N         | N    | N  |
| viewExists     | Y    | N         | N    | N  |
| replaceView    | Y    | N         | N    | N  |
| renameView     | Y    | N         | N    | N  |

#### Namespace Operations

| Namespace Operation       | Java | PyIceberg | Rust | Go |
|---------------------------|------|-----------|------|----|
| listNamespaces            | Y    | N         | N    | N  |
| createNamespace           | Y    | N         | N    | N  |
| dropNamespace             | Y    | N         | N    | N  |
| namespaceExists           | Y    | N         | N    | N  |

> | renameNamespace           | Y    | N         | N    | N  |
> | updateNamespace           | Y    | N         | N    | N  |
> | updateNamespaceProperties | Y    | Y         | Y    | Y  |

Reviewer: typo/duplicate as I don't think there's an `updateNamespace` that's different from `updateNamespaceProperties`, and `renameNamespace` isn't a function in the HiveCatalog:
```suggestion
| updateNamespaceProperties | Y    | Y         | Y    | Y  |
```

---
title: "Implementation Status"
---
<!--
 - Licensed to the Apache Software Foundation (ASF) under one or more
 - contributor license agreements.  See the NOTICE file distributed with
 - this work for additional information regarding copyright ownership.
 - The ASF licenses this file to You under the Apache License, Version 2.0
 - (the "License"); you may not use this file except in compliance with
 - the License.  You may obtain a copy of the License at
 -
 -   http://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0
 -
 - Unless required by applicable law or agreed to in writing, software
 - distributed under the License is distributed on an "AS IS" BASIS,
 - WITHOUT WARRANTIES OR CONDITIONS OF ANY KIND, either express or implied.
 - See the License for the specific language governing permissions and
 - limitations under the License.
 -->

# Implementations Status

> Apache iceberg now has implementations of the iceberg spec in multiple languages. This page provides a summary of the
> current status of these implementations.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The Apache Iceberg spec has multiple language and engine implementations. This page provides an overview of their current capabilities.
```

## Versions

This section describes the versions of each implementation that are being tracked in this page.

| Language  | Version |
|-----------|---------|
| Java      | 1.7.1   |
| PyIceberg | 0.7.0   |
| Rust      | 0.3.0   |
| Go        | 0.1.0   |

## Data Types

| Data Type      | Java | PyIceberg | Rust | Go |
|----------------|------|-----------|------|----|
| boolean        | Y    | Y         | Y    | Y  |
| int            | Y    | Y         | Y    | Y  |
| long           | Y    | Y         | Y    | Y  |
| float          | Y    | Y         | Y    | Y  |
| double         | Y    | Y         | Y    | Y  |
| decimal        | Y    | Y         | Y    | Y  |
| date           | Y    | Y         | Y    | Y  |
| time           | Y    | Y         | Y    | Y  |
| timestamp      | Y    | Y         | Y    | Y  |
| timestamptz    | Y    | Y         | Y    | Y  |
| timestamp_ns   | Y    | Y         | Y    | Y  |
| timestamptz_ns | Y    | Y         | Y    | Y  |
| string         | Y    | Y         | Y    | Y  |
| uuid           | Y    | Y         | Y    | Y  |
| fixed          | Y    | Y         | Y    | Y  |

> | binary         | Y    | Y         | Y    | Y  |

Reviewer 3: a) Add `Variant`
b) complex types? Struct, list, map? 

refer Type.java

## Data File Formats

| Format  | Java | PyIceberg | Rust | Go |
|---------|------|-----------|------|----|

> | Parquet | Y    | Y         | Y    | Y  |

Reviewer 3: we should include Avro aswell? 
https://iceberg.apache.org/docs/nightly/configuration/#write-properties

Reviewer 4: I think there was some confusion, I think we should split out the data and metadata part. In this table, I would suggest adding Avro as a data file format. Then we need another Avro, that's similar to the Puffin discussion below:

1. Basic support for Avro format, e.g. read/write capability, and this is what the file format section means.

| ORC     | Y    | N         | N    | N  |

> | Puffin  | Y    | N         | N    | N  |

Reviewer 3: Puffin can be a metadata format. But not data format as of https://iceberg.apache.org/docs/nightly/configuration/#write-properties

I know about delete vector writing in puffin. But currently there is no clear definition.

Reviewer 2: Yeah i'd probably break this out into the actual Puffin capabilities instead

"Table Stats, Delete Vectors, ect"

## File IO

| Storage              | Java | PyIceberg | Rust | Go |
|----------------------|------|-----------|------|----|
| Local Filesystem     | Y    | Y         | Y    | Y  |
| Hadoop Filesystem    | Y    | Y         | Y    | Y  |

> | Aws S3               | Y    | Y         | Y    | Y  |

Reviewer 4: Should we generalize this one? For example, `s3` can also be used for MinIO.

Reviewer 2: S3 Compatible
GCS Compatible
Memory FS? < Do we want to include this?

| Google Cloud Storage | Y    | Y         | Y    | Y  |
| Memory Fs            | Y    | Y         | Y    | Y  |

## Table Update Operations

### Table Spec V1

| Operation                   | Java | PyIceberg | Rust | Go |
|-----------------------------|------|-----------|------|----|

> | Update schema               | Y    | N         | N    | N  |
> | Update partition spec       | Y    | N         | N    | N  |

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
| Update schema               | Y    | N         | Y    | N  |
| Update partition spec       | Y    | N         | Y    | N  |
```

| Update table properties     | Y    | Y         | Y    | N  |
| Replace sort order          | Y    | N         | N    | N  |
| Update table location       | Y    | N         | N    | N  |

> | Append data files           | Y    | N         | N    | N  |
> | Rewrite files               | Y    | N         | N    | N  |
> | Rewrite manifests           | Y    | N         | N    | N  |
> | Overwrite files             | Y    | N         | N    | N  |

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
| Append data files           | Y    | Y         | N    | N  |
| Rewrite files               | Y    | Y         | N    | N  |
| Rewrite manifests           | Y    | Y         | N    | N  |
| Overwrite files             | Y    | Y         | N    | N  |
```

> | Row delta                   | Y    | N         | N    | N  |

Reviewer 3: Row delta is v2 spec. So, I don't understand mentioning it under v1 spec.

Reviewer 4: I think it is a copy paste :)

| Delete files                | Y    | N         | N    | N  |
| Update statistics           | Y    | N         | N    | N  |
| Update partition statistics | Y    | N         | N    | N  |
| Expire snapshots            | Y    | N         | N    | N  |
| Manage snapshots            | Y    | N         | N    | N  |

### Table Spec V2

> 

Reviewer: I think users typically think of the Table CRUD operations separately from the Table Maintenance operations. Would it be helpful to separate these out into different categories?

> 

Reviewer: I think users typically think of the Table CRUD operations separately from the Table Maintenance operations. Would it be helpful to separate these out into different categories?

Reviewer: Yes, that's what I meant 💯 

I think this could be seen similar to what @Fokko [suggested above](https://github.com/apache/iceberg/pull/11772#pullrequestreview-2501651835) as well

Reviewer 5: +1 to splitting

> | Operation                   | Java | PyIceberg | Rust | Go |
> |-----------------------------|------|-----------|------|----|
> | Update schema               | Y    | N         | N    | N  |
> | Update partition spec       | Y    | N         | N    | N  |
> | Update table properties     | Y    | Y         | Y    | N  |
> | Replace sort order          | Y    | N         | N    | N  |
> | Update table location       | Y    | N         | N    | N  |
> | Append data files           | Y    | N         | N    | N  |
> | Rewrite files               | Y    | N         | N    | N  |
> | Rewrite manifests           | Y    | N         | N    | N  |
> | Overwrite files             | Y    | N         | N    | N  |
> | Row delta                   | Y    | N         | N    | N  |
> | Delete files                | Y    | N         | N    | N  |
> | Update statistics           | Y    | N         | N    | N  |
> | Update partition statistics | Y    | N         | N    | N  |
> | Expire snapshots            | Y    | N         | N    | N  |
> | Manage snapshots            | Y    | N         | N    | N  |

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
| Operation                   | Java | PyIceberg | Rust | Go |
|-----------------------------|------|-----------|------|----|
| Update schema               | Y    | Y         | N    | N  |
| Update partition spec       | Y    | Y         | N    | N  |
| Update table properties     | Y    | Y         | Y    | N  |
| Replace sort order          | Y    | N         | N    | N  |
| Update table location       | Y    | N         | N    | N  |
| Append data files           | Y    | Y         | N    | N  |
| Rewrite files               | Y    | Y         | N    | N  |
| Rewrite manifests           | Y    | Y         | N    | N  |
| Overwrite files             | Y    | Y         | N    | N  |
| Row delta                   | Y    | N         | N    | N  |
| Delete files                | Y    | Y         | N    | N  |
| Update statistics           | Y    | N         | N    | N  |
| Update partition statistics | Y    | N         | N    | N  |
| Expire snapshots            | Y    | N         | N    | N  |
| Manage snapshots            | Y    | N         | N    | N  |
```

> 

Reviewer: With PyIceberg, I've seen many users struggling to figure out why they are running into commit failures because reliability/concurrency safe features have yet to be implemented in the subproject. 

Hence, I think it would help the community tremendously if we could also host information regarding the implementation of these features on the status page.

These are the [reliability features listed in this section](https://iceberg.apache.org/docs/1.5.2/reliability/#reliability) like isolation levels, and commit retries/concurrent writes support

> 

Reviewer: With PyIceberg, I've seen many users struggling to figure out why they are running into commit failures because reliability features have yet to be implemented in the subproject. 

Hence, I think it would help the community tremendously if we could also host information regarding the implementation of these features on the status page.

These are the [reliability features listed in this section](https://iceberg.apache.org/docs/1.5.2/reliability/#reliability) like isolation levels, and commit retries/concurrent writes support

Reviewer: > As with other part such version history, it's more like a feature of time travel, maybe we should add features like incremental planning, incremental read, time travel into table read part?

Yes, I think that makes sense! I think that would be a good way to organize that information.

> As iceberg spec only supports serializable ioslation level, should we really need to mention this?

Now that you mention it, I think it would be helpful to update the documentation so that we explicitly describe the way Iceberg handles `snapshot` and `serializable` isolations are defined more clearly on the feature page (I can take a stab at that). I think this will help the language implementations correctly implement these behaviors consistently across.

The [Java API](https://iceberg.apache.org/javadoc/1.7.1/org/apache/iceberg/IsolationLevel.html) supports two isolation levels: serializable and snapshot isolation levels, and these modes dictate the type of commits that are allowed to be written on subsequent retries.

Do you think it would make sense to package these features as `commit retries` on the status page? Without this feature, the subprojects all fail on the first attempt if the metadata location of the table has changed since the beginning of the commit.

Reviewer: Sounds good to me @liurenjie1024

## Table Read Operations

### Table Spec V1

| Operation           | Java | PyIceberg | Rust | Go |
|---------------------|------|-----------|------|----|

> | Plan with data file | Y    | N         | Y    | N  |

Reviewer 6: Both Go and Pyiceberg support planning and reading data files for v1

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
| Plan with data file | Y    | Y         | Y    | Y  |
```

| Read data file      | Y    | N         | Y    | N  |

### Table Spec V2

| Operation                  | Java | PyIceberg | Rust | Go |
|----------------------------|------|-----------|------|----|

> | Plan with data file        | Y    | N         | Y    | N  |

Reviewer 6: Both Go and Pyiceberg support planning and reading data files for v2, including position deletes.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
| Plan with data file        | Y    | Y         | Y    | Y  |
```

> | Plan with position deletes | Y    | N         | N    | N  |
> | Plan with equality deletes | Y    | N         | N    | N  |

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
| Plan with position deletes | Y    | Y         | N    | N  |
| Plan with equality deletes | Y    | Y         | N    | N  |
```

> | Read data file             | Y    | N         | Y    | N  |
> | Read with position deletes | Y    | N         | N    | N  |
> | Read with equality deletes | Y    | N         | N    | N  |

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
| Read data file             | Y    | Y         | Y    | N  |
| Read with position deletes | Y    | Y         | N    | N  |
| Read with equality deletes | Y    | N         | N    | N  |
```

## Table Write Operations

### Table Spec V1

| Operation   | Java | PyIceberg | Rust | Go |
|-------------|------|-----------|------|----|

> | Append data | Y    | N         | Y    | N  |

Reviewer 6: @Fokko Pyiceberg supports writes, correct?

Reviewer 4: Yes, for both V1 and V2 :)

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
| Append data | Y    | Y         | Y    | N  |
```

### Table Spec V2

| Operation              | Java | PyIceberg | Rust | Go |
|------------------------|------|-----------|------|----|

> | Append data            | Y    | N         | Y    | N  |

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
| Append data            | Y    | Y         | Y    | N  |
```

| updateTable     | Y    | Y         | Y    | Y  |
| renameTable     | Y    | Y         | Y    | Y  |
| tableExists     | Y    | Y         | Y    | Y  |

#### Table Spec V2

| Table Operation | Java | PyIceberg | Rust | Go |
|-----------------|------|-----------|------|----|
| listTable       | Y    | Y         | Y    | Y  |
| createTable     | Y    | Y         | Y    | Y  |
| dropTable       | Y    | Y         | Y    | Y  |
| loadTable       | Y    | Y         | Y    | Y  |
| updateTable     | Y    | Y         | Y    | Y  |
| renameTable     | Y    | Y         | Y    | Y  |
| tableExists     | Y    | Y         | Y    | Y  |

#### View Spec V1

| View Operation | Java | PyIceberg | Rust | Go |
|----------------|------|-----------|------|----|
| createView     | Y    | N         | N    | N  |
| dropView       | Y    | N         | N    | N  |
| listView       | Y    | N         | N    | N  |
| viewExists     | Y    | N         | N    | N  |
| replaceView    | Y    | N         | N    | N  |
| renameView     | Y    | N         | N    | N  |

#### Namespace Operations

| Namespace Operation | Java | PyIceberg | Rust | Go |
|---------------------|------|-----------|------|----|

> | listNamespaces      | Y    | N         | N    | N  |

Reviewer 6: All of the read-only REST catalog operations are supported by Go iceberg

> | listNamespaces      | Y    | N         | N    | N  |
> | createNamespace     | Y    | N         | N    | N  |
> | dropNamespace       | Y    | N         | N    | N  |
> | namespaceExists     | Y    | N         | N    | N  |
> | renameNamespace     | Y    | N         | N    | N  |
> | updateNamespace     | Y    | N         | N    | N  |
> | deleteNamespace     | Y    | N         | N    | N  |
> | loadNamespace       | Y    | N         | N    | N  |

Reviewer: I think `deleteNamespace` and `dropNamespace` may be the same operation. And `loadNamespace` operation may be `listTables` instead?

Updated with PyIceberg supported features below

```suggestion
| listNamespaces                | Y    | Y         | N    | N  |
| createNamespace               | Y    | Y         | N    | N  |
| dropNamespace                 | Y    | Y         | N    | N  |
| namespaceExists               | Y    | N         | N    | N  |
| renameNamespace               | Y    | N         | N    | N  |
| updateNamespaceProperties     | Y    | Y         | N    | N  |
```

> | listNamespaces      | Y    | N         | N    | N  |
> | createNamespace     | Y    | N         | N    | N  |
> | dropNamespace       | Y    | N         | N    | N  |
> | namespaceExists     | Y    | N         | N    | N  |
> | renameNamespace     | Y    | N         | N    | N  |
> | updateNamespace     | Y    | N         | N    | N  |
> | deleteNamespace     | Y    | N         | N    | N  |
> | loadNamespace       | Y    | N         | N    | N  |

Reviewer: I think `deleteNamespace` and `dropNamespace` may be the same operation. And `loadNamespace` operation may be `listTables` instead? And is `updateNamespace` = `updateNamespaceProperties`?

Updated with PyIceberg supported features below

```suggestion
| listNamespaces                | Y    | Y         | N    | N  |
| createNamespace               | Y    | Y         | N    | N  |
| dropNamespace                 | Y    | Y         | N    | N  |
| namespaceExists               | Y    | N         | N    | N  |
| renameNamespace               | Y    | N         | N    | N  |
| updateNamespaceProperties     | Y    | Y         | N    | N  |
```

Reviewer: Ah, that makes sense!

### Sql Catalog

The sql catalog is a catalog backed by a sql database, which is called jdbc catalog in java.

> | Database | Java | PyIceberg | Rust | Go |
> |----------|------|-----------|------|----|
> | Postgres | Y    | N         | Y    | N  |
> | MySQL    | Y    | N         | Y    | N  |
> | Sqlite   | Y    | N         | Y    | N  |

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
| Database | Java | PyIceberg | Rust | Go |
|----------|------|-----------|------|----|
| Postgres | Y    | Y         | Y    | N  |
| MySQL    | Y    | Y         | Y    | N  |
| SQLite   | Y    | Y         | Y    | N  |
```

---
title: "Implementation Status"
---
<!--
 - Licensed to the Apache Software Foundation (ASF) under one or more
 - contributor license agreements.  See the NOTICE file distributed with
 - this work for additional information regarding copyright ownership.
 - The ASF licenses this file to You under the Apache License, Version 2.0
 - (the "License"); you may not use this file except in compliance with
 - the License.  You may obtain a copy of the License at
 -
 -   http://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0
 -
 - Unless required by applicable law or agreed to in writing, software
 - distributed under the License is distributed on an "AS IS" BASIS,
 - WITHOUT WARRANTIES OR CONDITIONS OF ANY KIND, either express or implied.
 - See the License for the specific language governing permissions and
 - limitations under the License.
 -->

# Implementation Status

Apache iceberg's spec is implemented in multiple languages. This page provides an overview of the current capabilities.

## Libraries

This section lists the libraries that implement the iceberg spec.

- [Java](https://mvnrepository.com/artifact/org.apache.iceberg)

> - [PyIceberg](https://pypi.org/project/pyiceberg/)

Reviewer 4: I prefer PyIceberg, since we also redirect to PyIceberg on PyPi.

| timestamp      | Y    | Y         | Y    | Y  |
| timestamptz    | Y    | Y         | Y    | Y  |
| timestamp_ns   | Y    | Y         | Y    | Y  |
| timestamptz_ns | Y    | Y         | Y    | Y  |
| string         | Y    | Y         | Y    | Y  |
| uuid           | Y    | Y         | Y    | Y  |
| fixed          | Y    | Y         | Y    | Y  |
| binary         | Y    | Y         | Y    | Y  |
| variant        | Y    | Y         | Y    | Y  |
| list           | Y    | Y         | Y    | Y  |
| map            | Y    | Y         | Y    | Y  |
| struct         | Y    | Y         | Y    | Y  |

## Data File Formats

| Format  | Java | PyIceberg | Rust | Go |
|---------|------|-----------|------|----|
| Parquet | Y    | Y         | Y    | Y  |
| ORC     | Y    | N         | N    | N  |
| Puffin  | Y    | N         | N    | N  |

## File IO

| Storage           | Java | PyIceberg | Rust | Go |
|-------------------|------|-----------|------|----|
| Local Filesystem  | Y    | Y         | Y    | Y  |
| Hadoop Filesystem | Y    | Y         | Y    | Y  |
| S3 Compatible     | Y    | Y         | Y    | Y  |
| GCS Compatible    | Y    | Y         | Y    | Y  |

> 

Reviewer 4: I would start small, otherwise we'll end up with a big list Ecs, Oss, etc
